# Human_rDNA
Abstract
Leveraging the standard variant calling pipeline, ideally, this project tries to establish a explainable approach for connecting the dots between the genetic chararitsics of yeast and human. Additionally, a ChIP-seq peak analysis was also conducted to summarize and identify potential irregular RED1 protein expression within the rRNA region across several strains of S.cerevisiae. Results show that both high and low quality sequencing data from either human or yeast could be noisy, warranting further investigation beyond homopolymer and expansion segment filtering. Nonetheless, the consistent findings in the conserve regions of rRNA across human and yeast was intriging to see.
Introduction
rRNA is a type of RNA (ribonucleic acid) molecule that plays a crucial role in the process of protein synthesis in cells. Along with proteins, rRNA is an essential component of ribosomes, which are the cellular structures responsible for assembling amino acids into polypeptide chains during translation.
Human and yeast genomes encode hundreds of copies of the rDNA operon, which are arranged in tandem arrays on five chromosomes (13, 14, 15, 21, and 22 in human)\cite{reference1}\cite{reference2},and on yeast, RDN1 is an approximately 1-2 Mb region on the right arm of chr. XII consisting of 100-200 tandem copies of a 9.1 kb repeat which contains the genes for 5S, 5.8S, 25S and 18S rRNAs (represented by the RDN37, RDN25, RDN18, RDN58, and RDN5 loci)\cite{yeast}.Each rDNA encodes a 47S pre-rRNA that is posttranscriptionally processed into the 18S rRNA of the small ribosomal subunit and the 5.8S and 28S rRNAs of the large ribosomal subunit\cite{5s}. Human and yeast both have tens to hundreds of copies of 5S rRNA, but for the purpose of this project, we only focus on the 18S and 28S region of the rRNA.
Related work
From yeast to human, eukarya's genetic profile has evolved and varied significantly across species to provide different functions. Such as the long expansion segments that have been added to rRNAs without perturbing the preexisting core and varies drastically through inheritance\cite{related}. A similar concept to connect the variants and consistency across eukarya was explored between human and mouse in Parks(2019) et al. \cite{mouse}, where the authors analyized all 2546 human samples from the 1000 Genome Project\cite{thousandgenome} and 32 common mouse laboratory strains from the Mouse Genomes Project\cite{mous}. This work showed some promising connections between the allele characteristics across two species in close regions, but there were many limitation at the same time, such as the arbitrary chosen human and mouse genome reference as well as the different standard of sequencing method and sample tissue stratification.
Solution
Data
The 1000 Genome dataset consist of 2546 human samples across various age range and 11 distinctive demographic backgrounds. It captures small variants such as Single nucleotide variant (SNV), as well as insertion/deletion, duplication or translocation. In addition, a rare but insight feature collected by this dataset includes the family trio information, with which we have the power to look deeper into the generational inheritance pattern among the variants.In data preprocessing for both sets of data, quality control and appropriate trimming were performed. Since the 1000 Human Genome project's initial goal is to provide high coverage paired-end reads sequenced across the entire human genome, none of the sample from the human dataset needs any trimming. This is worth mention is because the varying copy number of rRNA across people makes it difficult to precisely represent the allele frequency of a particular person if the sampling method has low coverage across genetic components. When using high coverage sample analysis, the results in variant calling is more trustworthy to be representative of the actually genetic profile.

    \item \textbf{Homopolymer Removal:}
    A homopolymer can be defined as a polymer made from many copies of a single repeating unit consecutively. And if you look through the entire rRNA region of the human reference, only a handful of them exists in the 18S and 28S region. With up to 10\% of allele allowed(1 per 10 base length, 2 per 20 and so on), and a minimum length of 10(including the allowed alleles), 19 pieces of homopolyers were identified from the GRCh38 human reference genome. 
    Shown in Figure\ref{fig:homo}, are their relatively start and end positions on the 28S and 18S region as well as their lengths.

  
    \item \textbf{Expansion Segment Filtering:}
    Expansion segments (ESs) are enigmatic insertions within the eukaryotic ribosome, the longest of which resemble tentacle-like extensions that vary in length and sequence across evolution, with a largely unknown function\cite{expan}. These long  wavely segments is attached to and floats outside of the ribosome structure while proned to lots of more variants than other regular regions in the rRNA region\ref{fig:expand}. 

    \item \textbf{Conserved Region Targeting:} 
    In Doris(2015) et al. \cite{conserve}, stretches of evolutionarily conserved sequences correspond with regions of high functional importance were identified. And this allows us to have a peak at these highly conserved nucleotide elements (CNEs) in 23S–28S rRNA from each phylogenetic domain, especially in Eukarya.
    In Figure\ref{fig:conser},out of the 57 CNEs located in the 28S region of S.cerevisiae, only 5 of them are no longer present in the human reference genome for two particular reason: either it has completed disappeared(outside of the bounding black box) and/or found but with two many variants(marked with stars and bounded by red box, where the number of stars means the number of location with variants), this correspond to number 4, 29, 42, 43, 49 and 52. The rest are all present in the human genome with the same order over all, and sits same distance apart from each other(within each bounding black box). This is quite a remarkable finding in my option, because from yeast to human, eukarya has evolve into thousands of species and there have been so much happening to our genetic profile since yeast. In another word, these CNEs have played a crucial role in protein synthesis through out the past thousands of years.
Results
Updates
